Queensland police are preparing to begin trials of an artificial intelligence system to identify high-risk domestic violence offenders, and officers intend to use the data to “knock on doors” before serious escalation.

The “actuarial tool” uses data from the police Qprime computer system to develop a risk assessment of all potential domestic and family violence offenders.

The algorithm has been in development for about three years and practical trials will begin in some police districts before the end of 2021.

“With these perpetrators, we will not wait for a triple-zero phone call and for a domestic and family violence incident to reach the point of crisis,” acting Supt Ben Martain said.

File photo of police tape
Calls to stop NSW police trial of national facial recognition system over lack of legal safeguards
Read more
“Rather, with this cohort of perpetrators, who our predictive analytical tools tell us are most likely to escalate into further DFV offending, we are proactively knocking on doors without any call for service.”

Martain says new system would mark a shift towards more preventive policing, like early interventions or diversionary programs in high-risk situations. It could not be used for Minority Report-style arrests, or as evidence in court.

“We [have] found perpetrators outside the point of crisis, when not in heightened emotional state or affected by drugs or alcohol, were generally more amenable to recognising this as a turning-point opportunity in their lives,” he said.

In the domestic and family violence space, many high-profile cases have followed familiar and predictable patterns of escalation, prompting criticisms of systemic “failures” to recognise those patterns and intervene.

Some domestic violence victims’ advocates – though cautious about the use of artificial intelligence – say a data-driven approach could prevent cases where those patterns exist from falling through the cracks.

“The system does need to be better able to identify and respond to high-risk offenders, especially those who go from relationship to relationship,” says campaigner Angela Lynch.

“We do need innovative responses in terms of how we deal with them, but it does have to be done so safely.

“You’d have to be really careful and you’d want to look at what the impacts are, particularly on groups that may be particularly vulnerable.”